Cloud computing has become increasingly popular in recent years due to its many advantages, including increased scalability, flexibility, and cost-effectiveness as according to Choudhary (2021). One of the main benefits of using cloud computing in a university environment as this project proves is that it enables easy access to virtual machines from anywhere with an internet connection, eliminating the need for dedicated host computers. This is particularly useful for students who may need to access their work from various locations, or for collaborative projects where multiple users need to access the same resources. In addition, students studying Cyber Security can use a Virtual Machine for example to test a variety of ‘malware’ in a ‘safe and controlled’ environment, and the student can easily ‘delete’ the VM when their research has been completed. Amazon Web Services (AWS) are among many ‘Cloud’ services that offer clients the ability to create ‘Virtual Machines’ in the ‘cloud’ such as a ‘Windows’ machine (Amazon Web Services, 2022b).
Another advantage of cloud computing is that it allows for easy scaling up or down of resources depending on the needs of the university. This means that if there is an increase in demand for computing resources, additional resources can be quickly added without the need for physical hardware. Additionally, cloud computing services can allow to implement automatic backups for example, which can ensure that important data is not lost in the event of a hardware failure or other disaster.
However, there are also some potential drawbacks to using cloud computing in a university environment. One concern is security, as sensitive data may be stored in the cloud and could potentially be compromised if the cloud service is not properly secured. This subject is further expanded upon in Appendix 2.
In contrast, using dedicated host computers with active directory in a university environment can provide greater control and security over computing resources. Active directory allows for centralised management of user accounts and access controls, which can help ensure that only authorised users have access to sensitive data. This approach can also provide greater control over hardware and software configurations, which can help ensure consistent performance and compatibility. However one disadvantage is that it is a ‘Windows’ product and compatibility with operating systems such as Ubuntu is a lot to be desired, even so more has been done in recent years to combat this dilemma.
Implementing a ‘Active Directory’ (AD) service in a self hosted environment brings its share of advantages and disadvantages. AD which is widely used in educational environments allows “administrators to manage enterprise-wide information efficiently from a central repository” and can contain information such as “users and groups, computers, and printers, and applications and services” as according to Desmond and Richards (2013).